# ModularProcess

ModularProcess provides an extensible structure for creating object-oriented data processing and file parsing pipelines. I wrote this library because I wanted a structure I could reuse for working with different the data files created from different scientific instruments.

## Installation

Install with [uv][uv]:

```sh
uv add git+https://github.com/eweix/ModularProcess
```

Install with [pip][pip]:

```sh
pip install git+https://github.com/eweix/ModularProcess
```

[uv]: https://docs.astral.sh/uv/
[pip]: https://pip.pypa.io/en/stable/


## Specification

ModularProcessing is a specification for processing data from various scientific instruments in a standardized manner.
It assumes that all files will follow the standard output format of their instrument, as well as a standardized directory structure.

### Filenames

Filenames in ModularProcessing follow the convention:

```
YYYY-MM-DD_{Experiment ID}_{Sample ID}_{name}.{extension}
```

* `Experiment ID`: an identification for the experiment, such as a notebook page. It is recommended that experiment IDs follow the convention III-NN-PPP:
	* III: three-letter initials of the researcher who gathered the data.
	* NN: two-digit notebook number where the experimental protocol and notes live.
	* PPP: three-digit pagenumber in the notebook, corresponding to the page where the experiment notes, observations, and protocol are detailed.
* `Sample ID`: An identifier for the given sample within the experiment. If generated by an instrument, this can be reused. Else, one should be assigned. 
* `name`: the name of the file. When in doubt, `name` should be verbose and give a description of the sample, such as the compound screened, the instrument used, or protein sequence tested.

`Experiment ID`, `Sample ID`, and `name` may contain any character [a-zA-Z]

#### Example: Valid and Invalid Filenames

The following filenames are valid, as they obey the principles outlined in the filename specification.

```
2025-08-22_DTB-04-11_Seq0003_DTK140-BY4741-timelapse.nd2
2026-05-14_EWW-03-98_WELLE01-Seq0000_YTK077-BY4741-image.nd2
2026-06-12_EWW-03-98_WELLE01_masks.zarr
2026-06-12_EWW-03-98_WELLE01_YTK077-cell-data.csv
```

The following filenames are invalid, as they deviate from the filename specification in one or more ways.

```
20250822_DTB-04-11_Seq0003_DTK140-BY4741-timelapse.nd2 # does not use YYYY-MM-DD date format
2026-05-14_EWW-03-98_WELLE01-Seq0000-YTK077-BY4741-image.nd2 # missing either name or sample ID
2026-06-12_EWW_03_98_WELLE01_masks.zarr # uses underscores within experiment ID
```


### FileLike objects

FileLike objects are wrappers for files that bundle the file path, metadata, and loading method.

1. A FileLike object MUST expose a `path` attribute. `path` is the path to the file, in string form.
2. A FileLike object MUST expose a `parent` attribute. `parent` is the root directory of the file.
3. A FileLike object MUST expose a `stem` attribute. `stem` is the base name of the file.
4. The FileLike object MUST expose a `load()` function. `load()` shall return the contents of the file. In the event that the FileLike is a dummy or placeholder object, i.e. it does not represent a real file, then this function should return a value of `None`.

```python
class NISPointFile(FileLike):
	def load(self) -> np.ndarray:
		from nd2 import imread
		return imread(self.path)
```

5. The FileLike object MAY have a `_parse_path()` function. If `_parse_path()` is implemented, it MUST return a dictionary containing the keys `sample`, `name`, `date`, and `expID`. If a filename does not follow this standard, the `_parse_path()` function MUST return `None`.

```python
class NISPointFile(FileLike):
    def _parse_path(self, f: str) -> Union[MetadataDict, None]:
        pattern = re.compile(
            r"Point(?P<sample>.*)_Channel(.*)_Seq(?P<name>\d{4})\.nd2$"
        )
        match = pattern.search(f)
        if match:
            return {
                "sample": match.group("sample"),
                "name": match.group("name"),
                "date": None,
                "expID": None,
            }
        return None
```

6. A FileLike object MUST expose a `canonical` attribute. `canonical` must be a string that contains the structured name of the file.
```
YYYY-MM-DD_{Experiment ID}_{Sample ID}_{name}.{extension}
```

7. A FileLike object MAY have a `canonize()` function. If `canonize()` is implemented, it MUST rename the file to the `.canonical` attribute. 

```python
class FileLike:
		def canonize(self):
        _, ext = os.path.splitext(self.path)
        os.rename(self.path, join(self.parent, f"{self.struct_name}{ext}"))
```


### LoaderLike objects

LoaderLike objects parse directories of files and bundle them into other LoaderLike or FileLike objects. Optionally, LoaderLikes can have more sophisticated parsing abilities for extraction of metadata from a directory.

1. A LoaderLike object MUST expose the attribute `.items`, which MUST be an iterable of LoaderLike or FileLike objects.

```python
class LoaderLike:
    def __init__(
        self,
        root: Union[str, None] = None,
        **metadata: Unpack[MetadataDict],
    ):
        self.root = root
        if root:
            files = self._gather(root)
            self.items = [self._construct(f, **metadata) for f in files]
        else:
            self.items = []
```

2. A LoaderLike object MUST expose a `_construct()` method to generate entries in `.items`. `_construct()` should be modified for each specific LoaderLike. `_construct()` MUST take metadata overrides (`MetadataDict`) as valid arguments to allow for user control of FileLike metadata.

```python
class LoaderLike:
    def _construct(self, f: str, **metadata: Unpack[MetadataDict]):
        return FileLike(f, **metadata)
```

3. A LoaderLike object MUST expose a `.add_items()` method that uses `_construct()` to add new FileLike or LoaderLikes to `.items`.

```python
class LoaderLike:
    def add_items(self, paths: Union[str, list[str]], **metadata: Unpack[MetadataDict]):
        if isinstance(paths, str):
            paths = [paths]
        to_add = [self._construct(f, **metadata) for f in paths]
        self.items.extend(to_add)
```

4. A LoaderLike object MUST expose a `_gather()` method to take a directory as input and feed it to `_construct()`, appending the contents to `.items`. Customization of `_gather()` is optional, but is encouraged for convenience.

```python
class LoaderLike:
    def _gather(self, root: str) -> list[str]:
        return [join(root, f) for f in os.listdir(root)]
```

### ProcessLike objects

ProcessLike objects take a LoaderLike object or FileLike object as input. They then act on it to create an output, such as by segmenting an image to provide a mask. Optionally, a ProcessLike can return a LoaderLike or FileLike as output, allowing steps in a data processing pipeline to be mixed and matched.

1. A ProcessLike object MUST expose a `.run()` method. `run()` MUST act on the FileLike or LoaderLike object to process its contents, then assign the outputs to the `output` attribute. `.run()` MAY write files as part of its function; if writing to files, `.run()` MUST use `.output_path` as the parent directory.
2. A ProcessLike object MUST expose a `.inputs` attribute, which is an iterable of the FileLike or LoaderLike inputs to the ProcessLike.
2. A ProcessLike object MUST expose a `.output` attribute, which stores the outputs of the `.run()` method. This MAY be the actual data output as variables, or it MAY be another LoaderLike or FileLike object that can be sent to another ProcessLike.
3. A ProcessLike object MUST expose a `.output_path` attribute, which MUST be a string. If the `.run()` method writes files, it MUST use `.output_path` as the parent directory.

## Contribution

Please follow [Conventional Commits v1.0.0][cc], using `feat`, `fix`, and `docs` as the types.

[cc]: https://www.conventionalcommits.org/en/v1.0.0/#specification
